Streaming generator doc (#63791)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-core/internals/streaming-generator.md

```{eval-rst}
.. testcode::

  import ray

  @ray.remote
  def numbers():
      for i in range(3):
          yield i

  gen = numbers.remote()

  for ref in gen:
      print(ray.get(ref))
```

```{eval-rst}
.. testoutput::

  0
  1
  2
```

The `gen` variable is an `ObjectRefGenerator`.
Iterating over it returns one `ObjectRef` per yielded value.
But note that `ObjectRefGenerator` is not serializable and can't be passed to other remote tasks.

## Defining a Streaming Generator Function

A streaming generator function is defined using the {func}`ray.remote` decorator, the same as a normal remote function.

But inside the decorator, Ray checks whether the decorated Python function is a generator function by calling [inspect.isgeneratorfunction(function)](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/remote_function.py#L149).

Note that a user can explicitly set `num_returns` to an integer for a generator function.
However, it is not the scope of this document because, in that case, Ray treats the invocation as a fixed-return task, iterates over the generator while buffering task outputs, and returns the fixed set of `ObjectRef` objects from `.remote()`.

> Besides `num_returns`, a user can set `_generator_backpressure_num_objects` to control the backpressure behavior of a streaming generator task.

Reviewer: Could you give me an example of what backpressure means here? I thought every time we call ray.get, we trigger one object being produced?

Author: I removed the statement. It mentions backpressure too early and causes confusion.

> Besides `num_returns`, a user can set `_generator_backpressure_num_objects` to control the backpressure behavior of a streaming generator task.

Reviewer 2: nit: Could you link to the backpressure section here

Author: I removed the statement. It mentions backpressure too early and causes confusion.

1. The leased worker receives the `PushTask` RPC.
2. The worker deserializes the arguments.
3. The worker fetches and unpickles the remote function.
4. The worker calls the user function.

For a normal task, calling the function produces the final return values.
The executor worker serializes the return values.
Small returns are sent back inline in the `PushTask` reply, while larger returns are put in the executor node's plasma object store and referenced from the reply.

For a streaming generator task, calling the function produces a Python generator or async generator object.
The executor then drives the generator itself:

1. For a sync generator, the executor worker [repeatedly calls send(stats)](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_raylet.pyx#L1301-L1340).
2. For an async generator, the executor worker [runs the asend(stats) loop](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_raylet.pyx#L1355-L1444) with the worker event loop used for async task execution.

Each `send(stats)` or `asend(stats)` resumes the Python generator until the next `yield`.
After a value is yielded, the generator is paused.

> Before the executor calls `send(stats)` or `asend(stats)` again, it serializes the yielded value, stores it inline or in plasma, sends `ReportGeneratorItemReturns` to the caller, and waits for backpressure if needed.

Reviewer 2: Personal preference, feel free to ignore if you disagree: instead of vaguely discussing the report process here, we could just say, the executor reports the generated output to the caller (link to the reporting value section below) before calling send to generate the next output.

Author: 👍

For each yielded value, the executor runs [report_streaming_generator_output](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_raylet.pyx#L1170-L1233), which performs the following steps:

1. [Create the streamed return object](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_raylet.pyx#L1459-L1493) using the deterministic ObjectID for the yield index.
2. Store the yielded value using the same direct-return versus plasma-return rule as normal task returns. Direct return values are serialized into the report RPC. Plasma return values are stored in plasma and referenced from the report.
3. Send [ReportGeneratorItemReturns](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/core_worker.cc#L3155-L3217) from the executor to the caller.

When the caller [handles ReportGeneratorItemReturns](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_manager.cc#L779-L878), it performs the following steps:

1. Insert the returned object into the caller-side `ObjectRefStream` at the yield index.
2. Handle the reported return object using the same direct-return versus plasma-return logic as normal task returns.

> 3. [Make the reported ObjectRef ready](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_manager.cc#L821-L847). If a caller is [waiting in next(gen)](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_private/object_ref_generator.py#L188-L237) for this in-order yield index, that wait can now finish.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I might've missed something when I was looking through this, but the return path was actually a little involved. The report generator item returns call doesn't actually send the object to the caller if the object was in plasma. Instead, a get call was needed. Do we want to clarify this here or is this too much detail.

Author: Change to `Handle the reported return object as a direct return or a plasma return, using the same logic as normal task returns.`. Hoping that is much clearer now.

> The following diagram shows the reporting path for the first yielded value:

Author: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the reporting path for yielded values:
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: we can consider using mermaid UML diagrams here (not sure if it is supported in our docs page though)

Author: I think it is not supported, unfortunately.

  |                 attempt_number = 0
  |
  |  Insert ObjectRef(T, 2)
  |  into ObjectRefStream at yield index 0
  |
  |  next(gen) returns ObjectRef(T, 2)
  |
  |---------------- ReportGeneratorItemReturnsReply ------>|
  |                 total_num_object_consumed = 1
  |                 (also releases backpressure if the
  |                 caller delayed the reply)
  |
  |                         ...
  |
  |<---------------- ReportGeneratorItemReturns -----------|
  |                 returned_object.object_id = ObjectID(T, 3)
  |                 item_index = 1
  |                 generator_id = ObjectID(T, 1)
  |                 attempt_number = 0
  |
  |  Insert ObjectRef(T, 3)
  |  into ObjectRefStream at yield index 1
  |
  |  next(gen) returns ObjectRef(T, 3)
  |
  |---------------- ReportGeneratorItemReturnsReply ------>|
  |                 total_num_object_consumed = 2
  |
  |                         ...
  |
  |<----------------------- PushTaskReply -------------------|
  |                 return_objects[0] = generator_ref
  |                 streaming_generator_return_ids = [...]
```

The executor repeats this protocol for every yielded value.

> The final `PushTask` reply marks the generator task as complete.

Reviewer 2: Question/clarification: Are we sending multiple PushTask reply during the process?

Author: I fixed the misleading word `final`. There is only 1 `PushTask` reply.

The caller handles this reply in [`TaskManager::CompletePendingTask`](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_manager.cc#L908-L1085).
The reply contains [`streaming_generator_return_ids`](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/protobuf/core_worker.proto#L172-L174), which are streamed return ObjectIDs and whether each return is stored in plasma.
It doesn't contain the yielded values themselves because those values were already reported through `ReportGeneratorItemReturns`.
The caller uses the number of entries in `streaming_generator_return_ids` to write the end-of-stream marker.
For example, if the generator yielded three values, the marker is written at yield index `3`.
This marker tells `ObjectRefGenerator` that the next index will never be reported, so iteration should stop instead of waiting forever.

> The [ReportGeneratorItemReturnsRequest](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/protobuf/core_worker.proto#L434-L450) RPC ordering isn't guaranteed.

Reviewer: Just to make sure I understand, does this mean that if I request the next two objects A and B, it might return B before A? Would that cause any issues?

Author: The executor can report them in the order [B, A], but the caller will wait until A arrives.

The caller resumes the executor by consuming object refs from the `ObjectRefGenerator` by calling `next(gen)` or iterating over the generator.
When the unconsumed count drops below the threshold, the caller replies to all held backpressured report RPCs with the cumulative number of consumed objects.
Each report reply updates the executor-side consumed count and can wake an executor blocked in `WaitUntilObjectConsumed()`.

## Stopping Consumption

If the caller stops iterating but keeps the `ObjectRefGenerator` alive, Ray keeps the caller-side stream alive.
With backpressure enabled, this can leave the executor paused in `WaitUntilObjectConsumed()`.

When the `ObjectRefGenerator` goes out of scope, its [destructor](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_private/object_ref_generator.py#L289-L295) asks the caller-side core worker to delete the `ObjectRefStream` for the ObjectID of the generator ObjectRef.
[Deleting the stream](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_manager.cc#L690-L727) releases unconsumed streamed refs from the caller-side stream and replies to pending backpressured report RPCs with `NotFound`.

> This unblocks an executor that was waiting for the caller to consume more refs.

Reviewer 2: Does the backpressure mechanism simply stop checking if we're under the threshold if not found is returned? 

Also, the caller is technically the owner for the generated object. If the object ref stream already gone out of scope, are the created object immediately marked for eviction/deleted?

Author: > Does the backpressure mechanism simply stop checking if we're under the threshold if not found is returned?

It doesn't stop checking, but each NotFound will unblock it.

> Also, the caller is technically the owner for the generated object. If the object ref stream already gone out of scope, are the created object immediately marked for eviction/deleted?

The `ObjectRefStream` is simply a caller struct that tracks stream slots. Even if it is out of scope, refs for the created objects can still be in scope, and then they won't be immediately marked for eviction.

## Getting Streamed Return Values

The caller receives an `ObjectRefGenerator` from `.remote()`:

```python
gen = numbers.remote()
ref = next(gen)
value = ray.get(ref)
```

`next(gen)` doesn't return the yielded Python value.
It returns an `ObjectRef` for the next yielded value.

Internally, `ObjectRefGenerator` [asks the caller-side core worker](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_private/object_ref_generator.py#L188-L282) to peek at the next expected object ID in the stream.
If the item isn't ready, the caller waits until the executor reports that object reference through `ReportGeneratorItemReturns`.
When the item is ready, the caller consumes the corresponding stream entry and returns the corresponding `ObjectRef` to Python.
If the caller previously held report replies because of backpressure, this consume operation can release those held replies once the unconsumed count drops below the threshold.

The caller-side core worker can compute the ObjectID for the next yield index before the executor reports it.

> However, it doesn't return that ref until it is ready for the following reasons:

Reviewer: Learned, thanks!

## Finishing the Generator

When the Python generator raises `StopIteration` or `StopAsyncIteration`, the executor finishes the streaming task.
The completion flow is:

1. The executor [waits for all in-flight ReportGeneratorItemReturns RPCs](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/python/ray/_raylet.pyx#L1345-L1352) to finish before sending the final `PushTask` reply. This prevents the task from appearing complete before the caller receives one of the yielded objects.
2. The executor sends the final `PushTask` reply. This reply includes the generator ObjectRef and the [list of streamed return ObjectIDs](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_execution/task_receiver.cc#L54-L60) produced by the task.
3. The caller handles the final `PushTask` reply, records how many streaming return objects the task produced, and marks the stream as ended.
4. The caller [writes an internal end-of-stream marker](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/ray-2.55.0/src/ray/core_worker/task_manager.cc#L1078-L1085) into the caller-side `ObjectRefStream`.

> 5. Later, when `ObjectRefGenerator` reaches the marker, it checks the generator ObjectRef.

Reviewer 2: What if stop iteration is raised in the executor UDF prematurely?

Author: That will be treated as an application error. You will get a `ref` on the caller side, and when you `ray.get` on it, it will raise a ray.exceptions.RayTaskError wrapped with StopIteration.

At that point:

1. If the generator task succeeded, iteration raises `StopIteration` or `StopAsyncIteration`.
2. If the generator task failed and the failure hasn't been surfaced yet, `ObjectRefGenerator` returns the generator ObjectRef once. `ray.get` on that ref raises the task error.
3. After surfacing that error ref, later iteration stops.

## Failures, Retries, and Reconstruction

If the generator raises an application exception, Ray reports an error object at the current stream index.
The caller receives an `ObjectRef` for that item, and `ray.get` on that ref raises the task exception.
Ray also uses the generator ObjectRef, available through `gen.completed()`, to represent completion or failure of the whole generator task.

> Ray can retry a streaming generator task through the same task retry machinery used for normal tasks. This assumes that the generator task is idempotent and deterministic.

Reviewer 2: nit: we might want to clarify that the retry starts from the beginning.

Author: 👍
